dbt Core and DuckDB Quickstart (#4087)
dbt-labs/docs.getdbt.com: website/docs/quickstarts/duckdb-core-qs.md

---
title: "Quickstart for dbt Core using DuckDB"
id: duckdb
description: "Install dbt Core and DuckDB to begin testing within minutes"
platform: 'dbt-core'
icon: 'fa-light fa-square-terminal'
hide_table_of_contents: true
---

## Introduction

> In this quickstart guide, you’ll learn how to install dbt Core and DuckDB, and import sample data from the fictional e-commerce Jaffle Shop data set within minutes. DuckDB is an in-process SQL OLAP database management system optimized for data analytics. Installing dbt Core and DuckDB together allows you to test all of the available features and functionality dbt has to offer locally on your computer (no data warehouse required), and the Jaffle Shop provides a pre-built dbt project ready to run out of the box. 

Reviewer: sugg being specific by using "dbt Core" instead of "dbt" since there's dbt Cloud-specific features

```suggestion
In this quickstart guide, you’ll learn how to install dbt Core and DuckDB, and import sample data from the fictional e-commerce Jaffle Shop data set within minutes. DuckDB is an in-process SQL OLAP database management system optimized for data analytics. Installing dbt Core and DuckDB together enables you to test all the available features and functionality dbt Core has to offer locally on your computer (no data warehouse required), and the Jaffle Shop Git repository provides a prebuilt dbt project that's ready to run out of the box. 
```

Author: Per feedback from PM we should leave Core out. One of the drivers for this is to allow people to test a quick setup so we can push them towards Cloud

Author: In this quickstart guide, you’ll learn how to install dbt Core and DuckDB, and import sample data from the fictional e-commerce Jaffle Shop data set within minutes. DuckDB is an in-process SQL OLAP database management system optimized for data analytics. Installing dbt and DuckDB together enables you to test all the available features and functionality dbt Core has to offer locally on your computer (no data warehouse required), and the Jaffle Shop Git repository provides a prebuilt dbt project that's ready to run out of the box.

Reviewer: gotcha! thank you for the extra context 🙏

> In this quickstart guide, you’ll learn how to install dbt Core and DuckDB, and import sample data from the fictional e-commerce Jaffle Shop data set within minutes. DuckDB is an in-process SQL OLAP database management system optimized for data analytics. Installing dbt Core and DuckDB together allows you to test all of the available features and functionality dbt has to offer locally on your computer (no data warehouse required), and the Jaffle Shop provides a pre-built dbt project ready to run out of the box. 

Author: ```suggestion
In this quickstart guide, you’ll learn how to install dbt Core and DuckDB, and import sample data from the fictional e-commerce Jaffle Shop data set within minutes. DuckDB is an in-process SQL OLAP database management system optimized for data analytics. Installing dbt and DuckDB together enables you to test all the available features and functionality dbt has to offer locally on your computer (no data warehouse required), and the Jaffle Shop Git repository provides a prebuilt dbt project that's ready to run out of the box.
```

## Prerequisites

> * To use the dbt CLI, you must know some command line basics. In particular, you should understand `cd`, `ls` and `pwd` to navigate through the directory structure of your computer.

Reviewer: with the release of dbt Cloud CLI, we are now using [these guidelines](https://dbt-labs.slack.com/archives/C02NCQ9483C/p1697021993676429) when referring to the CLI for clarity 

```suggestion
* You must know some command line basics to use dbt Core. In particular, you should be familiar with `cd`, `ls` and `pwd` so you can navigate through the directory structure of your computer.
```

Author: This was copied from another QS - https://docs.getdbt.com/quickstarts/codespace?step=1 so we should make a note to update it there as well.

> * A Windows, Mac, or Linux computer with sufficient storage. The Jaffle Shop sample data set is small and lightweight, taking up less than 200MB. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* You have a Windows, Mac, or Linux computer with sufficient storage. The Jaffle Shop sample data set is small and lightweight, taking up less than 200 MB. 
```

Author: Will leave it in since the other guides are written this way but may be worth considering removing "you must have" to make it less wordy, since that's assumed since these are prerequisites

> * [Python 3.5](https://www.python.org/downloads/) or higher.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* You must have [Python 3.5](https://www.python.org/downloads/) or newer.
```

> * [Create a GitHub account](https://github.com/join) if you don't already have one. [Set up Git](https://docs.github.com/en/get-started/quickstart/set-up-git) on your computer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* You must have a [GitHub account](https://github.com/join). For details, refer to [Set up Git](https://docs.github.com/en/get-started/quickstart/set-up-git) in the GitHub documentation.
```

> * (Optional) [GitHub Codespace](https://docs.github.com/en/codespaces/managing-codespaces-for-your-organization/enabling-or-disabling-github-codespaces-for-your-organization) enabled for your account.

Reviewer: sugg removing this from the prereqs since it's for requirements. perhaps in a Related Content section tho? 

```suggestion
```

```suggestion
```

Author: It's a requirement if they're choosing to use the Codespace option. Recommend leaving it in here so it's next to the other items and less likely to be missed.

## Installation instructions

> Select the following format that applies to your environment. Copy and paste the commands (you can copy them all at once or line-by-line) into your command line interface(CLI) and execute them. The syntax may vary slightly for each, but the result of the commands is the same. They will: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Select a format below that applies to your environment. Copy and paste the commands (you can copy them all at once or line-by-line) into your command line interface (CLI) and execute them. The syntax varies slightly for each, but the result of the commands is the same. They will: 
```

> - Clone the [jaffle_shop_duckdb github repo](https://github.com/dbt-labs/jaffle_shop_duckdb) to your local machine.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Clone the [jaffle_shop_duckdb GitHub repo](https://github.com/dbt-labs/jaffle_shop_duckdb) to your local machine.
```

- Change the directory to the Jaffle Shop.
- Create a Python virtual environment.
- Install and update pip.
- Install dbt Core and dependencies.
- Install DuckDB and dependencies.
- Build the Jaffle Shop project in dbt Core.
- Generate (`dbt docs generate`) and serve (`dbt docs serve`) dbt docs to your browser (localhost).

> For the complete list of dependencies that will be installed, read the [**requirements.txt**](https://github.com/dbt-labs/jaffle_shop_duckdb/blob/duckdb/requirements.txt) file in the jaffle_shop_duckdb Github repo. 

Reviewer: sugg using "refer" vs "read" to be more inclusive. some people with disabilities could be using screen reader

```suggestion
For the complete list of installed dependencies, refer to the [requirements.txt](https://github.com/dbt-labs/jaffle_shop_duckdb/blob/duckdb/requirements.txt) file in the jaffle_shop_duckdb GitHub repo. 
```

<Tabs>
<TabItem value="Bash" label="bash/zsh (Mac)">

```shell
git clone https://github.com/dbt-labs/jaffle_shop_duckdb.git
cd jaffle_shop_duckdb
python3 -m venv venv
source venv/bin/activate
python3 -m pip install --upgrade pip
python3 -m pip install -r requirements.txt
source venv/bin/activate
dbt build
dbt docs generate
dbt docs serve
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="csh" label="csh/tcsh">

```shell
git clone https://github.com/dbt-labs/jaffle_shop_duckdb.git
cd jaffle_shop_duckdb
python3 -m venv venv
source venv/bin/activate.csh
python3 -m pip install --upgrade pip
python3 -m pip install -r requirements.txt
source venv/bin/activate.csh
dbt build
dbt docs generate
dbt docs serve
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="powershell" label="Windows Powershell">

```shell
git clone https://github.com/dbt-labs/jaffle_shop_duckdb.git
cd jaffle_shop_duckdb
python -m venv venv
venv\Scripts\Activate.ps1
python -m pip install --upgrade pip
python -m pip install -r requirements.txt
venv\Scripts\Activate.ps1
dbt build
dbt docs generate
dbt docs serve
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="codespace" label="GitHub Codespaces">

> #### Steps:

Reviewer: to reuse content instead of duplicating it (avoid user confusion -- is this content the same/different -- , and for easier docs maintenance in the future), you can point to the codespace qs

```suggestion

For step-by-step instructions, refer to the [Quickstart for dbt Core using DuckDB](/quickstarts/codespace?step=1). 

```

Author: Going to leave this in per feedback from conversations with PM and SME. Will alter these steps appropriately when the Jaffle Shop Repos are merged

> 1. Ensure you have [Codespaces](https://github.com/features/codespaces) enabled for your GitHub organization or turned on as a beta feature if you're an individual user.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> 2. Open the [jaffle_shop_duckdb](https://github.com/dbt-labs/jaffle_shop_duckdb) repo in your browser.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> 3. Click the green **Code** button near the top right of the repo's homepage (you may already be on it).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> 4. Rather than cloning the repo like you normally would, click the **Codespaces** tab of the pop-out and then click **Create codespace on `duckdb`**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> <div style={{maxWidth: '400px'}}>

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

>     <Lightbox src="/img/codespace-quickstart/open_in_codespaces.png" title="Open in Codespaces" />

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

>     </div>

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

> 5. Wait for Codespaces to boot (this may take a few minutes).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> 6. Select whether you'd like to use the Web IDE or open the codespace in your local environment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> 7. When the Codespaces opens, a **Task** pane will show up and call `dbt build` to show you how it's done.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> 8. (Optional) Install the recommended extensions (like **dbt Power User extension**).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> 9. Open up a new terminal and type: `dbt build`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

## Query the data

> The Jaffle Shop project will seed the data set to DuckDB, which can then be manually queried from the duckcli tool. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Jaffle Shop project seeds the data set to DuckDB, which can then be manually queried from the DuckCLI tool. 
```

Author: duckcli is a product name, so shouldn't be in code blocks.

Reviewer: isn't it a command?

Reviewer: ah gotcha! updated it so it refers to the product name versus the command name (one uses to execute it)

![Screenshot 2023-10-19 at 2 15 08 PM](https://github.com/dbt-labs/docs.getdbt.com/assets/107218380/181704b3-604a-4f17-be3e-9f669830e7d4)

> The Jaffle Shop project will seed the data set to DuckDB, which can then be manually queried from the duckcli tool. 

Author: ```suggestion
The Jaffle Shop project seeds the data set to DuckDB, which can then be manually queried from the duckcli tool. 
```

Launch the DuckDB command-line interface (CLI):

    ```shell
    duckcli jaffle_shop.duckdb
    ```

    Run a query at the prompt and exit:

    ```
    select * from customers where customer_id = 42;
    exit;
    ```

> 

Reviewer: the above examples are not rendering properly. i think if you remove the leading whitespace it'll fix this issue.

> ## Browsing the data

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Browse the data
```

There are a few options available to browse the data within DuckDB: 

- [duckcli](https://pypi.org/project/duckcli/)
- [DuckDB CLI](https://duckdb.org/docs/installation/?environment=cli)
- [DBeaver SQL IDE for DuckDB](https://duckdb.org/docs/guides/sql_editors/dbeaver)

## Next steps

> Now that you've got dbt Core, DuckDB, and the Jaffle Shop data up and running, it's time to explore dbt's capabilities. Read through the following material to get a better understanding of dbt projects and commands:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now that you've got dbt Core, DuckDB, and the Jaffle Shop data up and running, you can explore dbt's capabilities. Refer to these materials to get a better understanding of dbt projects and commands:
```

> * [About projects](/docs/build/projects) will guide you through the structure of a dbt project and its components.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The [About projects](/docs/build/projects) page guides you through the structure of a dbt project and its components.
```

> * The [dbt Command reference](/reference/dbt-commands) will explain the various commands available and what they do.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The [dbt command reference](/reference/dbt-commands) explains the various commands available and what they do.
```

> * The [Courses](https://courses.getdbt.com/collections) offer a variety of beginner, intermediate, and advanced learning modules designed to help you become a dbt expert. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The [dbt Labs courses](https://courses.getdbt.com/collections) offer a variety of beginner, intermediate, and advanced learning modules designed to help you become a dbt expert. 
```

* Once you see the potential of dbt and what it can do for your organization, sign up for a free trial of [dbt Cloud](https://www.getdbt.com/signup). It's the fastest and easiest way to deploy dbt today!

> * Check out our other [Quickstart guides](/quickstarts) to begin integrating into your existing data warehouse.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Check out the other [quickstart guides](/quickstarts) to begin integrating into your existing data warehouse.
```

```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="codespace" label="GitHub Codespaces">

#### Steps:

1. Ensure you have [Codespaces](https://github.com/features/codespaces) enabled for your GitHub organization or turned on as a beta feature if you're an individual user.
2. Open the [jaffle_shop_duckdb](https://github.com/dbt-labs/jaffle_shop_duckdb) repo in your browser.
3. Click the green **Code** button near the top right of the repo's homepage (you may already be on it).
4. Rather than cloning the repo like you normally would, click the **Codespaces** tab of the pop-out and then click **Create codespace on `duckdb`**.
<div style={{maxWidth: '400px'}}>
    <Lightbox src="/img/codespace-quickstart/open_in_codespaces.png" title="Open in Codespaces" />
    </div>

5. Wait for Codespaces to boot (this may take a few minutes).
6. Select whether you'd like to use the Web IDE or open the codespace in your local environment.
7. When the Codespaces opens, a **Task** pane will show up and call `dbt build` to show you how it's done.
8. (Optional) Install the recommended extensions (like **dbt Power User extension**).
9. Open up a new terminal and type: `dbt build`

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

## Query the data

> The Jaffle Shop project seeds the data set to DuckDB, which can then be manually queried from the duckcli tool. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Jaffle Shop project seeds the data set to DuckDB, which can then be manually queried from the DuckCLI tool. 
```

since you're referring to the product name (good point!), sugg match its casing like this:

![Screenshot 2023-10-19 at 2 15 08 PM](https://github.com/dbt-labs/docs.getdbt.com/assets/107218380/1be8ff39-e5dc-4d9e-b504-3c1a233dd1c3)

Launch the DuckDB command-line interface (CLI):

```shell

duckcli jaffle_shop.duckdb

```

Run a query at the prompt and exit:

> ```shell

Author: ```suggestion
```sql
```

select * from customers where customer_id = 42;
exit;

```

## Browse the data

There are a few options available to browse the data within DuckDB: 

- [duckcli](https://pypi.org/project/duckcli/)
- [DuckDB CLI](https://duckdb.org/docs/installation/?environment=cli)
- [DBeaver SQL IDE for DuckDB](https://duckdb.org/docs/guides/sql_editors/dbeaver)

## Next steps

Now that you've got dbt Core, DuckDB, and the Jaffle Shop data up and running, you can explore dbt's capabilities. Refer to these materials to get a better understanding of dbt projects and commands:

* The [About projects](/docs/build/projects) page guides you through the structure of a dbt project and its components.
* The [dbt command reference](/reference/dbt-commands) explains the various commands available and what they do.
* The [dbt Labs courses](https://courses.getdbt.com/collections) offer a variety of beginner, intermediate, and advanced learning modules designed to help you become a dbt expert. 
* Once you see the potential of dbt and what it can do for your organization, sign up for a free trial of [dbt Cloud](https://www.getdbt.com/signup). It's the fastest and easiest way to deploy dbt today!

> * Check out the other [quickstart guides](/quickstarts) to begin integrating into your existing data warehouse.

Reviewer: not sure where to put this so adding it here (apologies for being "out of place"!)

you should also add a new tile for this new qs. it's in the `website/vercel.json` file.
